IA-64 testing
===============

The IA-64 tests are organized by the interface they observe.  A CSV inventory
or the presence of a C symbol is not a test oracle: a test must execute the
relevant behavior and compare an architectural or guest-visible result.

Test layers
-----------

``tests/unit/``
  Pure decoder, floating-point register-format, and firmware ABI layout tests.
  These do not boot a guest.  ``test-ia64-fpreg`` checks the architected spill
  representation rather than the host ``float64`` cache.

``tests/unit/ia64/``
  Hand-encoded TCG microprograms split into non-overlapping ``core``,
  ``memory-nat``, ``fp``, ``rse``, ``mmu``, ``interrupt``, and ``pal`` groups.
  The runner starts QEMU paused, resumes it with QMP, waits for an explicit
  terminal IP or predicate, stops it, and parses versioned ``IA64STATE``
  records.  The parser ignores the surrounding human-oriented HMP text and
  rejects unknown schema versions.  There is no fixed startup delay.  GR NaT,
  FR spill pairs and NaTVal, predicates,
  FPSR, UNAT, CCV, CFM, and rotation state can therefore be asserted directly.
  The end-to-end GDB test starts QEMU with ``-s`` and checks the IA-64 raw
  register layout, 128-bit FR transfer format, writable registers, and the
  architecturally constant r0 and p0 registers over the remote protocol.

``tests/qtest/``
  Machine wiring tests.  They cover the IA-64 handoff block, RTC, persistent
  NVRAM, PCI configuration space, sparse I/O, I/O SAPIC Remote IRR, and ATI
  VGA pitch/stride without depending on firmware console prose.

``tests/functional/ia64/``
  Project-owned EFI applications booted from deterministic FAT, GPT, MBR,
  El Torito, and UDF media.  Guest results use the stable protocol::

    IA64TEST suite=<suite> case=<case> status=PASS
    IA64TEST suite=<suite> case=<case> status=FAIL code=<hex> detail=<text>
    IA64TEST suite=<suite> status=DONE passed=<n> failed=<n>

  Success requires one result for every required case, ``failed=0``, a valid
  ``DONE`` count, and a live QEMU process.  Merely keeping QEMU alive or finding
  a firmware message is not success.  ``test_shell.py`` additionally drives
  the pre-boot shell through QMP and the serial console, then reuses its NVRAM
  file to verify persistent variables, clock state, and one-shot ``BootNext``.

Running the tests
-----------------

Configure an IA-64 system build and build QEMU and the firmware::

  ./configure --target-list=ia64-softmmu
  ninja -C build qemu-system-ia64 \
      roms/ia64-firmware/ia64-firmware.bin

Run all IA-64 unit and TCG tests::

  build/pyvenv/bin/meson test -C build --suite ia64 --print-errorlogs

Use this build-local Meson rather than an arbitrary host installation.  QEMU's
configure process selects it to match the version that wrote the build data.
Plain ``meson test`` in the source directory has no build data to read; either
pass ``-C build`` as above or run ``./pyvenv/bin/meson test`` from ``build``.

Run one microprogram, a substring selection, or a repeated case::

  python3 tests/unit/ia64/test_tcg_group.py \
      build/qemu-system-ia64 --group fp \
      --test fma_preserves_extended_precision
  python3 tests/unit/ia64/test_tcg_group.py \
      build/qemu-system-ia64 --group mmu --match vhpt
  python3 tests/unit/ia64/test_tcg_group.py \
      build/qemu-system-ia64 --test addp4_decode --repeat 100

Run machine tests and project-owned firmware tests::

  build/pyvenv/bin/meson test -C build --suite qtest-ia64 --print-errorlogs
  build/pyvenv/bin/meson test -C build --suite func-ia64 --print-errorlogs
  build/pyvenv/bin/meson test -C build --suite func-ia64-thorough --print-errorlogs

Run only the pre-boot shell scenarios::

  build/pyvenv/bin/meson test -C build 'qemu:func-ia64-shell' --print-errorlogs

The EFI applications require ``ia64-linux-gnu-gcc``, ``ld``, and ``objcopy``.
Meson builds each application once; functional tests consume those outputs and
do not invoke a compiler for each scenario.

Maintainer validation builds
----------------------------

The normal user-facing build lives in ``build/``.  The following disposable,
out-of-tree directories are used only during maintainer validation; they are
not alternative installation or runtime configurations:

``build-ia64-minimal/``
  A small, fast IA-64 build for architectural TCG and focused regression runs
  that do not require the complete emulated device set.

``build-ia64-asan/``
  An IA-64 sanitizer build for finding invalid host memory accesses and
  undefined behavior, including defects in the IA-32 compatibility path.

``build-ia64-lto/``
  An IA-64 link-time-optimization build that checks compilation, linking, and
  execution when the compiler optimizes across translation units.

``build-x86_64-validation/``
  A native x86_64 system-emulation regression build.  It is not used to run an
  IA-64 guest; it checks that IA-32 compatibility changes made in shared x86
  TCG code preserve the behavior of QEMU's ordinary x86_64 target.

These directory names describe test roles only.  Their configure options are
maintainer-local details rather than documented user interfaces.

Adding a TCG case
-----------------

Derive the encoding and expected behavior from the IA-64 architecture manual,
not from the translator implementation.  Reuse the encoder in the matching
``tests/unit/ia64/encoding_<family>.py`` module, give the program an explicit
terminal loop, and define it in exactly one ``cases_*.py`` semantic test group.
``encoding.py`` is only the compatibility facade and shared microprogram
harness.  The typed registry rejects missing, duplicate, or renamed entries,
and attaches coverage tags, specification references, and required emulator
features to every case.

Arithmetic tests should assert the destination FR spill pair and FPSR
directly.  Do not append ``getf`` or ``stf`` only to observe an arithmetic
result; those instructions have their own transfer tests.  Likewise, assert
the GR NaT bitmap and predicate mask instead of inserting ``tnat`` and
predicated ``adds`` as an observer.

The command below lists the registry without starting QEMU::

  python3 tests/unit/ia64/test_tcg_group.py --list

The deterministic JSON coverage inventory is generated from the same typed
registry, so it cannot drift from the executable case set::

  python3 tests/unit/ia64/test_tcg_group.py --inventory \
      > ia64-coverage.json
